
On The Blessed Trinity
======================

:tags: The Prayer of Love and Silence
:category: Lectio
:date: 2014-12-04 05:00
:author: A Carthusian
:summary: from 'The Blessed Trinity and The Supernatural Life'

..

.. image:: {filename}img/the-blessed-trinity-andrei-rublev.jpg
   :alt: The Trinity, Andrei-Rublev (1370-1430), Moscow

..

The Dogma
---------

God is subsistent Being itself. The word 'being' applies strictly only to God.

    Deus solus vere essentiae nomen tenet - God alone has the name of true
    being.
    
    -- St. Jerome

For all other things, ourselves included, compared to that pure and
perfect substance, are not even shadows. That is why God gave his name when
speaking to Moses as *He who is (Exodus 3:14)*.

    Tam verum enim esse Deus habet, quod nostrum esse, suo comparatum, nihil
    est - so truly has God being, that our being, compared to his, is nothing.

    -- St. Bonaventure

God is one. He possesses unity, in a supereminent manner: or, more accurately,
he is unity itself, absolute simplicity. In him there is no distinction of
parts, no accident, no change.

    Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.

    -- Deuteronomy 4:4

None the less, this one God is three Persons. God is Father: he begets a Son
in a unity of nature, without division or change. And from the Father and the
Son proceeds equally the Holy Spirit. The Father is God, the Son is God, the
Holy Spirit is God; and these three are but one and the same God. This trinity
of Persons is no less necessary than the unity of being.

The Trinity is essential to God just as much as his divine nature. The divine
processions are not something added to his essence, already formed and
complete: they are the very substance, the very perfection of God. To be in
three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, is in reality the same as being
God, although our intellect cannot grasp the equivalence of these statements.
Both propositions, nevertheless, bear witness to the same necessity, and if we
are able to state them separately it is because we only know God in indirect
ways, in the obscurity of faith. We must be on our guard lest we attempt to
measure the mystery of the Trinity by the narrowness of our weak and
discursive concepts.

The divine eternity is as a changeless present, wherein the Father begets the
Son, and both breathe forth the Holy Spirit. St. Augustine compares the Son to
air, ever filled with light, receiving at every moment a renewal without
change of the whole light of the sun. The divine generation did not take place
at the beginning of time, once and for all. It is a divine act, or rather it
is *the* divine act, eternal and unending, which never ceases and is never
interrupted, any more than is the divine Being from whom, in reality, it
cannot be distinguished. *Now* - at every moment of time - this act is being
accomplished: the Son is born of the Father.

    Ego hodie genui te - this day have I begotten thee.

    -- Psalm 2:7

The divine Persons are subsistent relations. Amongst creatures, relations such
as paternity or sonship are only accidents. Take away the 'accident', and the
father and the son remain just men. In God, however, everything is simple, all
is subsistent, all is God. That is why in the blessed Trinity the fatherhood
is the whole being of the Father, which is identical with the divine being.
So, too, the sonship of the Son is the whole being of the Son, and the same
holds of the Holy Spirit. According to his whole being, the Father is *ad
Filium*; and, according to his whole being, the Son is *ad Patrem*. Were our
supernatural sufficiently pure, sufficiently deep, we would see in this not
only the perfect solution of the apparent contradiction between these truths -
God one, yet three - but the necessity of the one included in the that of the
other.

    Each of the Persons refers not less to the others than to himself; and
    that is the reason for their reduction to unity, which is utterly beyond
    our comprehension.

    -- St. Gregory Nazienzen

The divine Persons are really distinct. That is why there can exist between
them those interchanges of knowledge an love, which can only belong to
subsistent personalities. The Father is not the Son, nor is the Son the
Father: the duality is so real and so true it suffices to constitute the
requisite number under the Old Law for the value of a witness.

    If I judge, my judgement is true, because I am not alone, but I and the
    Father that sent me. And in your law it is written that the testimony of
    two witnesses is true.

    -- John 8:16-17

Yet, although the Son is a different Person from the Father, he is not
something different: *alius non aliud*. In order to be truly the Son, he must
stand in opposition to the Father by a real relation which brings him back
into a unity of nature with the Father, a unity more perfect than any man can
conceive.

The Analogies of Knowledge and Love
-----------------------------------

[...]

A spiritual being has two vital operations - to know and to love. Now since
God is being in its absolute plenitude, these two operations belong to him by
necessity of essence and nature. The first vital operation of God is the act
of knowing. By that act, which is his essence itself, God produces a perfect
concept of what he knows perfectly; that is to say, himself. It is the
procession of the interior Word. In that divine Word, God, so to speak,
defines himself. The Word, that is, is the adequate expression of the Father.
The Word *Logos*, which St. John uses in the first chapter of his Gospel,
means both word *word* and *reason*; for it is the reason of God, as it is the
reason of everthing else. That word is rightly called the Immaculate Mirror,
the Image of the invisible God, the Splendour of his glory, and the Figure of
his substance. (*Wisdom 7:26*)

This intelligible fruit of the divine knowledge is also called 'generated
knowledge' -  *notitia genita, Deus intellectus*. In so far as this essential
representation of himself proceeds from him - perfectly equal and similar to
its source in the unity of the same nature - God is in the truest sense called
*Father*. Fatherhood belongs to God before it can ever be attributed to men.
It is from that divine and primal paternity that all paternity in heaven and
earth has its origin and name (Ephesians 3:15)

The Word is thus truly the Son of God, consubstantial with the Father,
co-eternal, enjoying the same omnipotence and the same immensity. Of all the
ways in which a being can produce another being, the most perfect is by
generation. For he who generates imparts his own nature to the one generated,
and pours into that being his own life. And since no dignity can be wanting in
the God, generation must be found in the Godhead.

    Shall not I that make others to bring forth children, myself bring forth,
    saith the Lord.

    -- Isaiah 66:9

The Word is also named Truth and Power *by appropriation*: that is to say, in
terms which can be referred to the other Persons, but which seem specially to
belong to him, because of his procession according to knowledge. We venerate
in the Father unity, eternity and power; in the Son, equality, beauty and
wisdom. The Son is also called *Ars Dei*, Life, the Ray, the Dawn, because he
is the integral manifestation of the divine Essence. It is in him that the
Father knows himself, and that we shall one day know the Father.

    He that seeth me, seeth the Father also. If you know me, you know also my
    Father; and from henceforth you know him, and you have seen him.

    -- cf. John 14:9 and 7

The Father and the Son meet eternally in essential beatitude. They give
themselves to one another in a most intimate unity and from that union leaps
up an immaterial flame, the ardour of infinite Love, namely the Holy Spirit.
For the act of the will produces in the one willing a new reality, and it is
this reality, subsistent and eternal in God, that is the third Person of the
Blessed Trinity. The name Love is peculiarly his, for he is the love with
which the Father loves the Son and the Son the Father. He is called *Spirit*
by analogy with the life-breath which animates us, and records the rhythm of
our emotions. He is the *Gift*, par excellence, for the essential character of
love is to give, and the first thing that love gives is itself. Goodness is
attributed to the Holy Spirit by appropriation. The Fathers also called the
third Person the Divine Fire, the Spiritual Balm, the Living Source, the
enjoyment and communion of the Father with the Son, for he is the embrace
which consummates their union, the seal of plenitude upon the mystery of the
divine processions.

St. Thomas summarises thus the cycle of the divine operations *ad intra*.

    Both in us and in God there is a certain cycle in the acts of the
    intellect and the will, for the will tends towards that which was the
    beginning of the understanding. But whereas in us the circle ends in that
    which is external - the external good moving the intellect, and the
    intellect moving the will, and the will by appetite and love tending to
    the external good - in God, the circle ends in himself. For God, by
    comprehending himself, conceives the Word, which is the type of all things
    comorehended by him (inasmuch as He comprehends all things by
    comprehending himself), and from this Word he proceeds to love all things
    and himself. Thus someone has said that "the One engenders the One, and
    reflects its own heat upon itself." And the circle being closed, nothing
    more can be added, so that a third procession is impossible.

    -- St. Thomas, De Potentia Dei, Q.IX, art. 9

And the Angelic Doctor concludes with a word which opens out for us the
perspective of a new mystery, an extension and echo of the mystery of the
Blessed Trinity:

    There remains only room for that external procession, which we call
    creation.

    -- ibid.


